---
layout: post
title: "The Gladiator's Insurance"
date: 2015-04-30
---

Something different- an essay written for school on the relationship between football and insurance (with excessive reference's to Sloterdijk's Globes)

---

The gladiators of the glorious Romans, seemingly extinct thousands of years ago, have hardly disappeared from the world, resurrecting in the form of American football. The sport of football remains one of the most similar sports to the bestial, yet wildly popular games of the Romans, closely mirroring the popularity of the amphitheatre. With the excitement and ecstasy that football takes from its precedent, comes the consequences as well- the frequent injuries, pain, and gruesomeness. However, insurance is not solely a presence in the sport due to its disability coverage; insurance spans a large “sphere” of influence in the sport. Through its medical impact, presence through advertisements, and similarity to NFL contracts, insurance is greatly influential on the most popular sport in America. Additionally, through its relationship with football, insurance reveals itself as a sphere-engulfer, forming a layer of protection around already-existing spheres.

With the inherent danger of the sport of football- the loud, resonating sounds of colliding helmets, stomach turning tackles, bone shattering hits- it would be logical that most players take out disability insurance to protect themselves from the inevitability of an injury. Football players highlight Sloterdijk’s discussion of the Roman era gladiators- that “the last relevant difference between humans [is] the distinction between those who die sooner and those who die later” (Sloterdijk, 307). Each player, fulfilling their gladiatorial duty, aims to delay their metaphorical death in the arena each game, fighting for every possible advantage, potentially hurting opponents in the process in order to ensure their personal livelihood. The New Orleans Saints Bountygate scandal of 2011 uncovered the blatant attempts of some players to hurt opponents, exposing the fact that injuries are often not in “the realm of chance events”, but rather in “the realm of purposes and will” (Nietzsche, 96). With all of these risks of life-changing injuries, both caused intentionally and accidentally, would disability insurance not be an automatic purchase for football players?

In reality, most players choose not to purchase their own disability insurance. A study by CBS News in 2014 found that “most NFL players don't purchase disability insurance despite the risk of injury from playing professional football, according to insurance underwriters” (Berr). These young men, who have gone through their lives as standout athletes, have been encouraged to endure pain. At times, this encouragement can go too far, as in late 2014, Ohio State University player Kosta Karageorge apologized to his mother for being an “embarrassment” due to the concussions he had suffered in his football career, only to kill himself soon after. Karageorge was burdened by the necessity to remain strong, going to the lengths of apologizing for an injury he had suffered. This concerning culture reflects in the infrequent purchasing of insurance, as some may feel that doing so is a display of weakness. As a result, players choose to pass over the safety and financial protection that insurance provides.

Logically speaking, unless one is on the verge of being on a team and money is truly an issue, there is little to no downside to purchasing insurance, as many of those who are unable to sign million dollar contracts fail to do so due to the effects of injuries. Furthermore, B. L. Whorf mentions in his article Blazing Icicles that the “pain of loss” is more impactful than the “hope of gain”, which in this situation, suggests that players who have invested their lives into this game should secure this investment by allowing insurance companies to protect them (Whorf).

The NFL does provide its own health insurance to all players signed to a contract with a team. According to sports agency Del Duca Sports, NFL players receive about $200,000 in benefits when injured (Del Duca). In most cases, this amount is not nearly enough to cover the loss of pay from being unable to play, as the $200,000 sum is generally far exceeded by the money made by playing in games. Thus, the appeal of purchasing disability insurance outside of the NFL is great, though so few actually choose to do so.

Although insurance may be seen as universally beneficial to football, a potential downside to increased insurance coverage is not unimaginable. After all, “The more is expected of the insurance, the more inflated the terror becomes,” writes Sloterdijk (Sloterdijk, 567). Following this reasoning, the implementation of more insurance policies in the league would lead to an increase in terror, which in the case of NFL players, comes in the form of injuries. Theoretically, those with insurance may be willing to take more risks while on the field, generally leading to more injuries, and in turn, a less watchable product.

Despite this possibility that insurance may lead to more injury, it is more likely that insurance would lower the number of injuries suffered. “In so-called risk societies, however, the spirit of the insurance system drove out the willingness to take those very actions that gave them their name: a risk society is one in which anything truly hazardous is de facto forbidden” (Sloterdijk, 859). Sloterdijk’s point indicates that insurance, despite protecting against the repercussions of taking risks, generally decreases the willingness of individuals to take risks. In the realm of football, players would be less willing to take risks on the fields, lowering the number of injuries that occur. Furthermore, players who frequently suffer severe injuries may be able to receive a reasonable amount of money from insurance policies, allowing them to retire earlier rather than continue trying to play while injury-prone. This makes for a safer league in general, facilitated by the behavior-altering effects of insurance.

Here, we see a common trait of insurance, as it attempts to provide an even larger area (or volume, as it is a sphere after all) of coverage by surrounding the protective sphere of the NFL. This reveals the engulfing tendency of insurance, as it encapsulates the existing endosphere of the NFL, further securing the borders from the external.

NFL players are provided more than disability insurance, the league succeeds in providing other benefits to players as well, offering health, dental, and life insurance to players and their dependents. This fact was brought to light in recent news, as Cincinnati Bengals defensive tackle Devon Still was kept on the team’s roster in order to allow health insurance funding to go to Still’s daughter, who was fighting cancer. In this way, the NFL provides a “sphere of coverage and safety” to its players. This “sphere” of the NFL’s is more inclusive and rigidly-walled than others, maintaining a small, exclusive group of players in its sphere. When inside, players are “[pulled] into the extended realm of inner security”, allowing those inside to be protected from the external demons of disease and injury (Sloterdijk, 147). These players are provided with financial and medical support, which in the case of Still, is life-changing. Though the league attempts to “[cast] out evil from the inside and secure the borders”, as seen by the long suspensions given to participants in Bountygate, terror will always find a way in, as injury will always be a part of the game (Sloterdijk, 177). This is not a criticism of the NFL, but rather a trait of spheres- evil will always find a way to enter, even through the smallest of seams.

A recent development in regards to insurance in the world of football has been the increasing purchasing of “loss of value” insurance policies by college football players. These young men, who have millions of dollars and a career at stake, are able to secure at least some money by investing in insurance policies that may pay millions of dollars to them if a major injury can be attributed to a drop in draft stock. Policies like these allow for individuals who have spent their entire lives playing this game to be compensated if their life’s work is suddenly halted by a severe injury. Though these policies cannot insure the emotional pain of suffering a career-ending injury, a sphere of financial safety is constructed when “loss-of-value” policies are purchased, allowing college players to be insured that at the very least, they have money to lean back on to begin a new career.

The first player to potentially collect money for a claim like this is San Francisco 49ers rookie Morgan Breslin, who went undrafted in 2014 due to multiple injuries in his college career at USC. According to Yahoo, “Breslin may be in line to collect between $750,000 to $1 million as the first collegiate football player to receive a payout on a loss of value insurance policy” (Getlin). However, Breslin’s case is still being fought in courts at the moment, as Breslin’s insurer, Amtrust, has been unwilling to pay him, as Amtrust claims “Breslin can't recover benefits under the policy because he made ‘misrepresentations, omissions and/or concealments’ in the application and didn't inform the insurer of changes in his health” (Sistrunk). It is difficult to discern the “correct” side in this lawsuit without full details, but it seems evident that the insurance company is not fulfilling its end of the deal. Breslin’s injury was an “unforeseeable” one, just as the “perils of the seas” were in maritime insurance (Levy, 45). No previous condition had suggested that this injury would occur, as this injury was a “peril of the field”, and therefore he should be given his insurance money, as agreed to by the insurance company.

In Sloterdijk’s Globes, he points out the significance of scapegoats in society, as he writes about “the elevation of scapegoats to sacred kingship” (Sloterdijk, 181). The “loss-of-value” insurance policies allow for players to point out a clear scapegoat for their failures. Because this type of insurance can only be collected if it is clearly determined that an injury is the reason that the player lost value, players are able to see a direct cause for their fall in stock- injury. Thus, players can search for a scapegoat by pinpointing who caused this injury- an opposing player, a coach, etc. The “loss-of-value” policies make it unchallenging for players to place blame on a scapegoat, due to the nature of the policy to clearly state that injury caused a loss in value.

In the past, the NFL had purchased “occurrence” liability policies from a number of different insurance companies every year, acquiring a large amount of money if an “occurrence” ever did happen. These policies have become significant recently, due to the class-action lawsuit regarding concussions in 2013, where the NFL was forced to give $675 million to those who suffered concussions in their careers (Jaillet). Now, the battle continues between insurance companies and the NFL, with insurance companies claiming that these concussions were known injuries, that they were not truly accidents, as Nietzsche, when discussing the idea of purpose and nature, suggests “there is no accident” (Nietzsche, 109). If a player was forced to continue playing with a concussion, “there is no coverage because the resulting additional bodily injury was not caused by an occurrence” (Jaillet). Though suffering a concussion may seem like an accident, NFL teams often do not treat them correctly, as players frequently play with concussions since they are often not physically inhibiting. Regardless, this lawsuit will likely be an extensive one, as insurance companies will be unwilling to pay millions of dollars, and the NFL will be placed in a tough spot based on their previous actions regarding concussions if they lose.

Though insurance is generally capable of protecting individuals, its impact in regard to concussions is less clear. Last week, 49ers rookie phenom Chris Borland retired from the NFL after just one year, unheard of in the NFL. In his announcement, Borland stated “From what I've researched and what I've experienced, I don't think [football is] worth the risk… I'm concerned that if you wait till you have symptoms, it's too late” (Fainaru). This concern of Borland’s is very commendable, as most players become blinded by their love for both the game and the money associated with it, ignoring the physical implications of playing football for so many years. Concussions are especially difficult to consider when weighing the pros and cons of playing, as they often only affect one’s life years after retirement.

Borland’s statement brings up a valid criticism of insurance, in that it is reactive rather than proactive- people only get help ex post facto. Insurance was unable to protect Borland at all, as he felt that he had to quit the game in order to be safe from concussions. Borland’s bold decision may act as a spark, triggering a wave of players that follow in his path. Predicting the trajectory of this issue is difficult, the only guarantee being that insurance will be involved.

Though Borland and many others have been unable to receive help from insurance before an unfortunate occurrence, insurance does work to prevent tragedies through its rigorous research. As suggested by Whorf, insurance companies are able to help understand the causes of disasters by acquiring information. In doing so, insurance does act as a sort of “preventative function”, using data and patterns to prevent future mishaps.

The sport of football contributes to the insurance industry through advertising, namely, during the Super Bowl, with the two creating a bond through capital. According to Forbes, over half of Super Bowl viewers now tune in simply for the advertisements shown (Siltanen). With more eyes focused on the advertisements, these prime time commercials come at a high cost, with thirty second commercials estimated at $4.5 million dollars this year (Siltanen). Of these buyers are the common industries- beers, cars, chips, and of course, insurance. Every year, insurance companies are willing to invest millions of dollars into commercials during football games. These commercials serve numerous purposes, namely spreading insurance’s sphere by inviting new clients into it, thereby growing by incorporating “external forces into [its] own radius” (Sloterdijk, 158).

In recent history, the significance of insurance commercials during the Super Bowl has been proven to be substantial. During the 2015 Super Bowl, Nationwide ran a commercial about a child who was unable to experience the pleasures of a childhood, because, evidently, he was dead. The commercial received mass criticism on social media, with many claiming that Nationwide employed a dead child in order to profit off of its insurance. While true in a sense, Nationwide still attracted millions of viewers toward its brand, essentially marking the advertisement a success. These commercials only further bolster the partnership between the NFL and insurance companies, as the league allows valuable attention to be given to insurance companies that may be incapable of acquiring itself.

With the start of the NFL free agency period a few weeks ago, the insurance firm that is the NFL emerges. Several parallels exist between the NFL’s contract-signing process and insurance policy underwriting. For instance, players and potential insurance clients play similar roles when searching for a contract, both seeking the most optimal deal for themselves. However, players hold much more negotiating power in their circumstance than the insurance client. Players must “know their situation”, just as the Roman gladiators did, when exploring their options (Sloterdijk, 314). While gladiators understood the life-or-death situation in the bloody arenas, NFL players understand their past performance, physical state, and history that constitutes their NFL situation, and seek to be monetarily compensated based on it.

The tendency of NFL teams to cut players who are not performing up to standards is another similarity to insurance companies. Insurance companies often cut individuals who frequently require insurance money, making the relationship unprofitable for the company. In a similar sense, NFL teams very frequently cut players who are no longer contributing to the team, who are no longer profitable. Both organizations value profit greatly, as seen by their willingness to cut their clients whenever they are no longer valuable.

Though insurance has existed for over a century, the NFL has still not implemented it to the extent that it should. Players are only covered for a small amount of money in the case of an injury, and despite the value in doing so, they often choose to forego purchasing their own disability insurance. This is a real issue for players, as being unable to play is being unable to make a living. Furthermore, this would be a mutually beneficial endeavor for both players and insurance companies, with the former having protection in case of injury and the latter likely making a profit. This relationship has been seen in recent news with the increasing purchases of “loss-of-value” insurance by college football players, as the players are ensuring that their futures are secure by buying insurance.

The presence of insurance can also be felt through other means in football. We see the blatant attempts by insurance companies to receive attention by running advertisements in prime time spots like the Super Bowl, hoping to extend its sphere of coverage. Furthermore, the contracts of the NFL are highly similar to insurance policies, extending the existence of insurance in football.

As seen by these examples, insurance acts as a sphere-engulfer. Sloterdijk mentions that humans “produce endospheres in almost every situation”, but the truth is that humans tend to form layers of endospheres, with “every interior [referring] to another interior” (Sloterdijk ,197-198). Insurance is an illustration of this claim, as regardless of what sphere it is dealing with, it is able to completely surround a sphere with an even larger one, offering a larger area of protection and safety. In the case of disability insurance, insurance engulfs the already-existing protective sphere of the NFL, providing even more defense from “the countless incalculable factors” of the game (Sloterdijk, 176). Insurance helps solidify the NFL’s exterior, “separating the sphere from everything that is supposedly not itself” (Sloterdijk, 178). Insurance further engulfs the NFL’s sphere through its advertisements and its similarities to NFL contracts, creating an association between the two entities. By doing so, the distinction between the realm of football and the realm of insurance becomes hazy, for the “endosphere and exosphere can become confused” (Sloterdijk, 197). Though the football is not as spherical as its siblings, the basketball and baseball, it is capable of being encapsulated by the sphere of insurance, creating an intimate relationship between the two.

Works Cited

Berr, Jonathan. "Most NFL Players Don't Buy Disability Insurance." CBSNews. CBS, 16 May

Web. 7 Mar. 2015.
Fainaru, Steven. “SF’s Borland Quits Over Safety Issues.” ESPN NFL. ESPN. 16 Mar. 2015.

Web. 16 Mar. 2015

Getlin, Rand. "Niners Rookie Morgan Breslin Could Be First College Football Player to Collect

Big on Insurance after NFL Draft Fall." Yahoo Sports. Yahoo, 12 May 2014. Web. 8 Mar.

2015.

Levy, Jonathan. 2012. Freaks of Fortune. Harvard University Press.

Nietzsche, Friedrich. 2011. Dawn: Thoughts on the Presumptions of Morality. Stanford

University Press.

Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1974. The Gay Science. New York: Random House.

Siltanen, Rob. "Yes, A Super Bowl Ad Really Is Worth $4 Million." Forbes. Forbes Magazine,

29 Jan. 2014. Web. 12 Mar. 2015.

Sistrunk, Jeff. "Ex-USC Player Seeks Dismissal Of Insurer's Suit From NJ - Law360." Law360.

Portfolio Media Inc., 20 Jan. 2015. Web. 8 Mar. 2015.

Sloterdijk, Peter. 2014. Globes: Spheres Volume II: Macrospherology. Semiotext(e).

"Summary of NFL Player Benefits." Del Duca Sports. N.p., n.d. Web. 9 Mar. 2015.

Whorf, B.L. Blazing Icicles. The Hartford Agent. Mar. 1941.

