---
layout: post
title: "A Terror in Numbers"
date: 2015-05-20
---

Another essay I wrote for class, this one dealing with a relationship between statistics and terror- admittedly, some bizarre things were written.

---

A 20% chance of thunderstorms. A 99% chance of a deadly earthquake. A 0.03% chance of a car crash. All of these statistics, all of which define a form of terror in each circumstance, can instigate a tinge of fear, uncertainty, and even terror into us. But in reality, what do these numbers mean? The relationship between the terror of the unknown and the prevalence of statistics and probability is clear-- as we gather are able to gather more information about the world, as we gain more technology, which Sloterdijk indicates is the “mode of revealing”, we are able to see more, predict more (Sloterdijk, 866). But, when envisioning the terror of the unknown, specifically, the sometimes unpredictable earthquake, how do statistics impact the effect of these terrors?

With the recency of fatal earthquakes like those of Nepal over the last month, the terror of the earthquake has materialized in the Western world once again. Over the few months, two high-magnitude earthquakes have decimated the country of Nepal, leaving hundreds dead and many more physically and mentally damaged. Western media has heavily covered the event, with the tragedy receiving significant media coverage and charity.

As a native Californian, the terror of the earthquake has always been a familiar one to me. Though I have never experienced an earthquake of severe magnitude, the 2007 Alum Rock earthquake, “then the largest in the Bay Area since the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake,” had its epicenter located nearly fifteen miles from me (Wikipedia). The occurrences of that day remain clear to me, and there exists only fitting word to explain the experience of that day-- terror.

Earthquakes are not solely sources of terror through direct contact; they shake the emotions and sanity of those connected to the affected. In August 2014, a 6.0-magnitude earthquake hit South Napa, and was “the strongest earthquake in 25 years in Northern California's Bay Area”, “injuring dozens of people, damaging historic buildings in downtown Napa and turning fireplaces into rubble”, eventually leading to it being declared a major disaster by President Barack Obama (Huffington). Though unheard of by much of the country, personal connection drew me to the earthquake, as my older brother lived in Napa at the time. Despite not being directly affected by the event, the period where I was left without any knowledge of my brother’s condition shook me with fear; I had no way of knowing the status of my own brother. The terror of the unknown-- not knowing about the safety of loved ones and holding no ability to affect the outcome-- is a horrific form of terror, even when not directly hit by it.

Facebook has implemented its own form of “secondary terror relief” through its earthquake safety check. Activated in April 2015, the Facebook feature allows people to mark themselves “safe” from earthquakes if their location is a reasonable distance from the quake. Friends are notified of the individual’s safety, and in doing so, the terror is relieved to those connected to potential victims, providing the emotional security that a loved one is safe from the terror of natural disaster, from a terror of the unknown. This is a somewhat groundbreaking move by the social media giant, becoming one of the first to use its wide user base in order to fight terrors of the unknown.

With earthquakes being so destructive, both to personal well-being and the economy, research and funding into extensive statistical analysis is to expected. A significant amount of this research can be attributed to insurance, as its nature is to “study and research into the causes of loss on a realistic basis” (Whorf, 173). With this use of probability and statistics to model the terror of the earthquake, we are able to predict their occurrences, along with optimize structures and actions to decrease damage when earthquakes do occur.

When exploring the relationship between earthquakes and statistics, it is appropriate to first delve into the origin and growth of statistics and probability as a figure of societal significance. The rise of probability is closely related to the growth in understanding of risk. As stated in Bernstein’s Against the Gods, “Humans beings have always been infatuated with gambling because it puts us head-to-head against the fates, with no holds barred” (Bernstein, 11). It was this infatuation with games of risk and chance that “inspired Pascal and Fermat’s revolutionary breakthrough into the laws of probability”, not forms of terror that terrified us into attempting to model and prevent their occurrences in the future (Bernstein, 11). However, through time, probability rose from a means of predicting gambling to a commonality in Western, or specifically American, society. When presented with a weather forecast of a 30% chance of rain, few think twice about the meaning of the probability, we have become accustomed to dealing with these numbers. As indicated by Sloterdijk, “the globalized world is the synchronized world”, a consequence of which is the unspoken understanding of concepts such as probability and statistics (Sloterdijk, 939).

Though numbers hold such value in our lives, what meaning do probabilities like these truly carry? Probabilities like those of coin flips and dice rolls are logical, we can comprehend how they work. However, what does a 20% chance of thunderstorms mean? If this day happened one-hundred times, there would be thunderstorms on twenty of the days? The luxury of replaying a day one-hundred times has yet to be invented, and “until we can distinguish between an event that is truly random and an event that is the result of cause and effect, we will never know whether what we see is what we’ll get, nor how we got what we got” (Bernstein, 197). Thus, statistics like these do not hold any real meaning, despite our insistence to continue the growth in use of them to predict events of the future, specifically, the unknown terrors of the future. We attempt to “maximize the areas where we have some control over the outcome while minimizing the areas where we have absolutely no control over the outcome and the linkage between effect and cause is hidden from us” (Bernstein, 197). In doing so, people are absorbed by the previously closed sphere of terror, as the secondhand stench of statistics elucidate that regardless of where you are, there is always a non-zero chance of terror occurring in one’s life.

Terrors such as earthquakes play a role in “spherical unification”, spreading the repercussions and emotional burden of terror to more than those directly and indirectly affected by the terror. When the news of a devastating earthquake spreads, the secondary stench of statistics spreads, frightening us about the possibility of a similar event occurring to ourselves. Statistics work “through semiotically transmitted, highly macroclimatically effective and sustained, nationwide self-contaminations” (Sloterdijk, 330). We intentionally expose ourselves to the fear-inducing stenches through our insistence to gain information from the mass media’s and its “mission to inform” (Sloterdijk, 330).

Statistics materialize fears, as the nature of probability is that exists a non-zero chance of events occurring. After the Nepal earthquakes, reports like that of the International Business Times were posted, with titles such as “What Regions Of The U.S. Are At Risk For A Major Earthquake?” (Nordrum) The contents of the article are frightening, pointing out facts like: “the Seismological Society of America reported that more than 143 million Americans in the lower 48 states are susceptible to some form of damage from earthquakes in their lifetime”, presenting statistics about likely areas in danger of earthquakes (Nordrum). In doing so, the terror of the Nepal earthquakes is projected across the Western world, as the initial terror spreads throughout the globe as a stench. Again, the modern world’s perpetual synchronization is revealed, as “its form is produced simultaneity, and it finds its convergence in things that are current” (Sloterdijk, 939).

Though probability has been implemented in order to prevent future terror, a necessary side-effect is the induced terror that probabilities cause. In the process of gaining information in order to predicting terrors, we are provided with statistics such as the following: “California has more than a 99% chance of having a magnitude 6.7 or larger earthquake within the next 30 years, according to scientists using a new model to determine the probability of big quakes” (Earthquake Safety). Numbers as high as 99% terrorize us, as we are essentially assured that a life-altering force of nature will come our way sometime in our lifetimes, a constant reminder of the facade that stability really is.

Though modeling and prediction has steadily improved over time, the accuracy of probabilities determined are hardly perfect. After all, they remain probabilities for a reason-- we cannot know exactly what will occur in the future. However, when disasters occur, we look for something to blame, leading to Sloterdijk’s observation of “the elevation of scapegoats to sacred kingship” (Sloterdijk, 181). In 2012, seven Italian scientists were convicted of manslaughter for “false assurances” prior to a 6.3-magnitude earthquake that hit Italy in 2009. The scientists chose not to issue a safety warning for the earthquake prior to it happening, which based on their predictions, had a low likelihood of occurring. In cases of earthquake prediction, “if the likelihood is very low — as it was in [the] case, despite the increased seismic activity in the weeks before — a warning may do more harm than good” (Povoledo). As a result, they chose not to notify the public of this terror, eventually paying for it in their freedom.

In situations like that of the Italian earthquake, how can liability be distributed? Though the scientists were guilty of not notifying the public of the potential earthquake, is it their job to announce every possible earthquake, regardless of probability? It is impossible to determine a cut-off point for significant and insignificant probabilities (though in the world of statistics, significance levels are generally set to 0.05, a seemingly arbitrary cut-off point). So, can we fault these scientists, and other individuals who fail to predict the future? It seems unreasonable to do so, as the terrors of the unknown occur regardless of how probable or improbable they are. In this case, the Italian scientists were punished for making an informed decision, which based on past knowledge and experiences, was what the believed to be the correct decision. In hindsight, their decision was incorrect and led to hundreds of fatalities and injuries, but probabilities can only be calculated from past occurrences, and unfortunately, not the future.
Though numbers are not the first thing associated with the concept of terror, its relationship in the understanding of the terror of the unknown is clear. In visualizing the terror of the earthquake, statistics help shape our feelings and actions towards the unknown through probabilities of events occurring. When tragedies such as the Nepal earthquakes occur, the terror is spread across the entire “synchronized world”, as we begin to fear a similar circumstance happening to ourselves. In this way, statistics and probability project terror throughout a sphere, reminding us of the fact life-changing events can occur at any given moment. Despite the negativity associated with the word terror, we all thirst for it-- the frequent need to take in news of disasters, statistics of these disasters occurring to ourselves, and similar actions all reflect our need for terror. Statistics help us quench this thirst, our inner George Carlin, by allowing the terror of the unknown to materialize in our own lives.

Works Cited

"2007 Alum Rock Earthquake." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, n.d. Web. 21 May 2015.

"Bay Area Earthquake Hazards." Earthquakesafety.com. Earthquake Safety Inc., n.d. Web. 19 May 2015.

Bernstein, P.L., 1998. ‘The Winds of the Greeks and the Role of the Dice’. Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk. Wiley.

Nordrum, Amy. "Nepal Earthquake 2015: What Regions Of The U.S. Are At Risk For A Major Earthquake?" International Business Times. IBT Media Inc., 27 Apr. 2015. Web. 18 May 2015.

"Obama Declares Napa Earthmake Major Disaster." Huffington Post. HPMG News, 11 Sept 2014. Web. 16 May 2015.

Povoledo, Elisabetta, and Henry Fountain. "Italy Orders Jail Terms for 7 Who Didn’t Warn of Deadly Earthquake." The New York Times. The New York Times Company, 22 Oct. 2012. tWeb. 18 May 2015.

Sloterdijk, Peter. 2014. Globes: Spheres Volume II: Macrospherology. Semiotext(e).

Whorf, B.L. Blazing Icicles. The Hartford Agent. Mar. 1941.